# 8 Networks: Starting with Specialist
Consider the following problem: you need a data-stream analysis program—further on, we will discuss a variant in which the problem is a
*realtime* data-analysis program. Incoming streams of data are to be converted into a high-level synopsis or overview of the situation being
described by the data streams. For example: data streams generated by medical monitoring equipment in an intensive care unit describe the

```text
patient's blood pressure, heart rate, temperature and many other vital signs; what does it all mean? What is the patient's condition? Is he
```
getting better or worse? Data streams generated by avionics equipment describe an airplane's current situation—is the current situation
satisfactory, optimal? Are there problems that the pilot should be worrying about? Data streams describe the condition of a complex market

```text
(a stock exchange, for example)—where is the market going? And incidentally, is insider trading going on? Data streams describe current
atmospheric conditions; what's the weather, and which way is it tending? There are many other examples. Software to solve this kind of
```
data-analysis problem is likely to become extremely important in the near future.
### 8.1 Big issues *Main themes:*
*Load balance*again is a main issue, and motivates our transformation from a specialist- to an agenda-parallel strategy.*Special considerations:*
*Agenda-parallel programs may be simpler than specialist-parallel programs*even where network-structured programs are
involved. Using abstraction to transform a process graph into a set of node-states that can be updated by workers in parallel
may allow us to localize all interconnections to a single process, instead of distributing them throughout the program.
A *realtime constraint*—the necessity of assuring that a computation can be completed within some fixed period—imposes
special scheduling requirements. We may be forced to seek a static task schedule, instead of relying on dynamic tasking.
### 8.2 The data-stream analysis problem
Our main focus in this chapter is a particular *software architecture*designed with the data-analysis problem in mind. A software architecture
is a structural framework for software—a plan that shows the basic module structure of a program, and the strategy for connecting the
modules together. The software architecture we'll use to solve the data-analysis problem is the *process trellis*.
The trellis architecture is based on a hierarchical graph of decision processes. Each process concentrates on one part of the problem. We can
break most data-analysis problems into pieces in such a way that some pieces are "low-level", others "high-level" and others in between.

```text
Low-level pieces generally focus on a particular data stream; high-level pieces attempt to answer a general question about the situation. If
```
we are monitoring patients in an intensive care unit, for example, a low-level process might concentrate on figuring out whether heart rate is

```text
stable or is trending higher or lower; a high-level process might concentrate on a question like "is the patient suffering from septic shock (or
```
some other disease)—or moving closer to this condition?" Medium-level processes concentrate on the recognition of patterns that are
relevant to several full-fledged diagnoses, without constituting a complete diagnosis in themselves.

```text
The trellis architecture requires that we break our data-analysis problems into pieces of this sort; then we organize the pieces into a
```
hierarchical graph, an "information flow" hierarchy that mirrors the *conceptual* hierarchy of the problem. Conceptually low-level processes
are at the bottom of the graph, high-level processes at the top. We can connect the bottom level of processes directly to data sources in the
outside world. Data flows into the program at the bottom, and percolates upwards.
All processes in the graph execute continuously and concurrently, and they communicate among themselves and with the outside world
using a simple and uniform protocol. Each process can be regarded as driving a meter that displays, at all times, the current status of the
sub-problem it's focused on—the latest input value in some data stream, the probability that a given diagnosis correctly describes the
situation, and so on. The parallelism in this architecture is important for two reasons. First, it will make it possible to apply lots of
computational power to the problem—in many cases, the outputs of our analysis will be useless if they aren't available quickly. Second, it
will allow us to build a clean, modular program out of conceptually-independent pieces.
Clearly, we've described a specialist-parallel problem. We noted in chapter 3 that "*specialist parallelism*involves programs that are
conceived in terms of a logical network. They arise when an algorithm or a system to be modeled is best understood as a network in which
each node executes a relatively autonomous computation, and inter-node communication follows predictable paths. The network may reflect
a physical model, or the logical structure of an algorithm...".
The network in our case clearly reflects *logical* as opposed to physical problem structure.
In the following section we discuss the trellis architecture in greater detail, and a natural specialist-parallel approach. We go on to discuss
refinements in the interest of efficiency—raising, in the final section, the important question of realtime execution. Realtime is a highly

```text
specialized topic that we can't discuss in detail, but we introduce several important points. Again, the real topic isn't the trellis architecture;
```
it's the highly significant *type* of problem that the trellis represents.

The experiments with the trellis we discuss below were conducted by Michael
Factor . His thesis [Fac90] is the definitive guide to this work.
### 8.3 The
process trellis architecture Each node in the trellis (where a node is simply a
decision process) continuously attempts to calculate a state based upon the
states of inferior nodes. When sufficient information is available from a node's
inferiors—each decision process defines for itself what "sufficient information"
means—it generates a new state. As a result, nodes one level up may recalculate
their own states, and so on. We supply two types of "logic probe" with the
system, "write probes" and "read probes," in order to accomplish input and

```text
output. Write probes are used to pump values into the system; read probes suck
```
results out. Touching a node with a write probe allows us to set the state of
that node to any value we choose. If we squeeze the write probe's trigger (every
probe comes equipped with a trigger), we cause the node whose state has just
been reset to *recompute* its state. Touching a node with a read probe causes
the node's current state to be returned. This current state can then be
displayed somehow on a terminal connected to the program. The node's current
state might be unknown -- insufficient data. If so, we can squeeze the read

```text
probe's trigger; this causes a *query* to be sent to the node we are touching.
```
When a node is queried, it attempts to compute a new, current state. If it
fails, it identifies which data values it's missing—which of its inferiors, in
other words, have failed to report values that are required by its
state-computing function. It then sends queries downwards to each one of these
inferior nodes. The interface between the trellis and the human user is

```text
constructed using probes; probes can also be used to wire separate trellises
```
together into a larger ensemble. For concreteness, figure 8.1 shows a diagram
representing the functions of each level of a trellis for patient monitoring in
an intensive care unit. Figure 8.2 shows the complete structure of this program
as it existed in Fall 1989.

*Massive parallelism*: One of the most interesting aspects of the trellis
architecture is its inherent scalability. It's easy to conceive of applications

```text
for ten-thousand node trellises (and beyond); and it's fairly easy to conceive
```
of building such programs. In very large trellises, many nodes will be similar
or identical in structure. This is true, for example, of a current trellis

```text
design that focused on a stock market in an attempt to detect insider trading;
```
the design encompasses thousands of nodes, but many are identical in structure.
A transportation network might have a large number of segments all of which must
be monitored separately and continuously, but the logic required will be

```text
basically the same in all cases; hence we may have, say, a thousand separate
```
segments, each involving an identical 10-node sub-trellis. The complete program,
of course, would involve other differentiated nodes as well. Scientific data

```text
gathering (in astronomy or weather domains, for example) may involve hundreds of
```
data sources, to most of which essentially the same set of trends-detection
filtering nodes may be attached. Of course, many trellis domains will require a
large collection of separate and distinct nodes. Our medical collaborators
estimate that the ICU trellis will incorporate several hundred nodes, most

```text
distinct in design, when it's finished; but this trellis focuses only on
```
hemodynamic monitoring. A general-purpose trellis for monitoring intensive care
patients in all areas might require thousands of distinct nodes. The trellis
architecture and its development environment is designed with the future needs
of very large programs specifically in mind. This discussion omits some fairly
significant details. But it's sufficient to allow us to study the programming
methodology issues that the trellis raises.
### 8.4 The specialist parallel
approach The specialist-parallel implementation is natural and suggests itself
immediately. Basically, our strategy will be to implement each node in the
trellis by a separate process. If our trellis has 100 nodes, we execute 100 eval
operations to create 100 separate processes. In this scheme of things, each
process has the following structure: while (TRUE) if (*any of my inferiors has

```text
transmitted a new state*) { *recompute my own state*; if (*my state has
changed*) *transmit the new state upwards to my superiors*; } else if (*any of
my superiors has transmitted a query*) { *try to recompute my state;* if (*I
succeed*) *transmit the new state upwards to my superiors*; else *transmit the
query downwards to each inferior from whom I need more information*; } This
outline ignores several points. First, it doesn't deal with probes; they are
```
handled in the same fashion as upward-filtering values (write probes) or
downward-filtering queries (read probes). If a node is top- or bottom-level, a
new state or query is (clearly) propagated no farther. If a higher-level node
appeals for data to the bottom level, and the bottom level doesn't have any
data, the buck stops there, so far as the trellis itself is concerned. If a
read-probe is attached to this bottom-level node, though, the node's current
status gets reported (via the probe) to a display. It becomes the user's duty to
supply the necessary data (via write-probe). There are two reasonable,
closely-related strategies for implementing this scheme. First, we might provide
one input stream for each node: in this case, whether I have new data to pass
*upwards* to node *Q*, or a query to pass *downwards *to* Q*, I attach a tuple
to *Q*'s unique input stream. In this case, each process will work roughly as
shown in figure 8.3.**Figure 8.3****Process outline for a specialist-parallel

```text
trellis**while (TRUE){* get the next tuple from my input stream;*if (*the tuple
```
shows that one of my inferiors has transmitted a new state *) {* recompute my

```text
own state;*if (*my state has changed *)* attach tuples recording my new state to
the input streams of each superior *; } else if (* the tuples shows that one of
my supervisors has transmitted a query *) {* try to recompute my state;*if (*I
succeed *)* attach state tuples to superior streams; *else* attach query tuples
to each inferior's stream from whom I need more information;*} } Each process's
```
input stream is a multiple-source one-sink in-stream of the sort discussed in

```text
chapter 3. Each node maintains a head index locally; the tail index floats in a
```
tuple. Accordingly, we implement* get the next tuple from my input stream *using

```text
a statement like in("Q-stream", ++head, ?information); information is probably a
struct; one field of this struct indicates whether this tuple holds a state or a
```
query. To attach a tuple to *R*'s stream, we use a sequence like in("R-stream

```text
tail", ?index); out("R-stream tail", index+1); out("R-stream", index,
NewInformation); The other strategy is (perhaps) slightly cleaner and more
modular. We implement each trellis node by means of *two* processes; one handles
```
upward-filtering data, the other downward-filtering queries. Node *Q* has two
streams associated with it, a query stream and a data stream. Each of the two
processes associated with *Q* reads one stream. *Q*'s current state is stored in
tuple space, where each of the two processes can access it. The query and data
streams are each in-streams of exactly the sort described above. To complete the
package, we need some computational routines to install in our coordination
framework . One way to understand the computation is in terms of a set of
state-computing procedures, one for each trellis node. A state-computing routine
could accept a single struct as an argument. The first component of the struct

```text
holds the previous state of *this* node; the next components specify the current
```
state of the other nodes upon which this node's state depends. The
state-computing routine attempts to compute a new state, and if it succeeds, it
assigns the new state value to the first field of its argument struct, TRUE. If
it can't compute a new state, because of insufficient data, it returns FALSE. In
this case, it assigns to the last field of the struct a value indicating *which*
inferior nodes are responsible for the state-computing failure—which nodes, in
other words, must be queried for more data. For concreteness, let's say that
some node is intended to calculate the likelihood that a patient is about to get
a headache: when headache-likelihood rises to the "highly probable" level, we
can give the patient some aspirin. Let's say that headache-likelihood depends on
the state of three inferior nodes: the *fatigue* node, the *hungry* node, and
the* arguing with flat-earth activists, unreconstructed Trotskyites or
functional programmers *node. The headache-likelihood node also depends on its
*own* previous state: even if all irritants suddenly disappear, a headache
doesn't dissipate instantly. We implement headache-likelihood by a routine that
accepts a single five-field struct. The routine looks at the input struct and
attempts to compute the current headache-likelihood. Suppose that the* currently
arguing *node's state is FALSE, but that we have *no* current values for
*fatigue* and *hungry*(their slots in the argument struct are filled by a
NO-VALUE token). In this case, the headache node might decide that it has
insufficient data to compute a new state. It assigns NO-VALUE to its own current
state, assigns *headache* and *fatigue* to the last ("values needed") field of
the argument STRUCT, and returns FALSE. (Note, on the other hand, that if
*arguing* were TRUE, and had been true for—say—the last ten minutes, the
headache node might well have decided that its current state was "* highly
probable *" or even "*certain*"*despite* the lack of current data from the
*fatigue* and the *hungry* nodes.) Once we've specified each node's state
function, we can build the coordination envelope that wraps around it. Suppose
we are using the one-process-per-node coordination framework. Each node *f* has
two corresponding routines: f\_state() and f\_envelope(). f\_state implements
*f*'s decision logic: it produces a new state given the appropriate input
values. f\_envelope handles inter-node communication, and invokes f\_state as
appropriate. See figure 8.4.**Figure 8.4****The process envelope for a
specialist-parallel trellis**void f\_envelope() { ... struct { stateType

```text
MyState, FatigueState, HungryState, ArguingState; Boolean ValuesNeeded[2]; /\*
if ValuesNeeded[0] is TRUE, need a new FatigueState...\*/ } CURRENT; while
(TRUE) {* get the next tuple from my input stream;*if (* an inferior has sent a
new state *) {* update field values of *CURRENT; f\_state(CURRENT); if (
```
CURRENT.MyState* has changed) attach tuples recording my new state to the input

```text
streams of each superior;*} else if (* a superior has sent a query *) { if (
```
f\_state(CURRENT) )

/\* recall f\_state() yields TRUE if it succeeds \*/* attach state tuples to

```text
superior streams; *else* attach query tuples to the streams of each node
mentioned in *CURRENT.ValuesNeeded; } } To create the trellis, we simply execute
an eval("Node f", f\_envelope()); for every trellis node.
```
### 8.5 A specialist →
agenda transformation The main performance problem with our specialist-parallel
starting-point is, again,*load balancing *. If we're going to create one process
for every node in a trellis, the result is (potentially) lots of processes. We
might in principle execute the trellis on a parallel machine that has one
processor for every trellis process, but that's unlikely. In most cases, it's
also unnecessary and undesirable. In order to give adequate performance (to
handle information fast enough to be useful), trellis programs will in general
need to run on many processors simultaneously. But when each trellis node
performs a relatively modest computation, it doesn't need a whole processor to

```text
itself; it can perfectly well share a processor with other trellis nodes. Thus
```
we might have, say, a one-hundred node trellis (hence, let's say, a one-hundred
process parallel program, in the specialist-parallel version) that executes too
slowly on a single processor, but whose computational requirements can easily be
met, in principle, by a five-processor parallel workstation. Our problem in the
latter case is again, in line with the previous chapter, to deploy one hundred
processes onto five processors in a reasonable way. We can't simply dump twenty
randomly-chosen processes onto each processor: unless every process does the
same thing (recall that a trellis is specifically a *heterogeneous* process
ensemble), some processors will wind up with a lot more work than other
processors. As we've discussed, this kind of poor load balance is bad for
performance. Performance is constrained by the speed of the slowest (* i.e *.,
the most heavily burdened) processor. And we've discussed the disadvantages in
making assumptions about any automatic process-reshuffling capabilities that the
runtime support system might have. As an alternative, a software architecture
like the trellis lends itself to some (fairly sophisticated) "static scheduling"
techniques—techniques to assign work to processors in such a way that load is
well-balanced at runtime. We discuss these techniques in the next section. Here
we describe a simpler approach, which also lays the groundwork for the next
variation. We can use exactly the sort of abstraction transformation discussed
in chapter 2 to transform our specialist- to an agenda-parallel solution, in the
process solving our load-balance problem. As discussed in chapter 2, abstraction
requires that we "raise the processes one level in the conceptual scheme." In
our case, each process will compute *many* trellis states on each iteration,
rather than embodying a single trellis node. A node's current state will be
represented by a state tuple. Hence a thousand-node trellis implies the
existence of a thousand state-tuples in tuple space, *not* 1000 separate
processes. The "agenda" is simple: while (TRUE) {* accept and install any new

```text
input data values or queries *;* update every node's state *; } Clearly, the
second agenda item entails many tasks; we can throw as many workers as we want
(up to a maximum of one per trellis node) into the updating process. In other
```
words, we'll do the following. We execute an unbounded series of iterations. On

```text
each iteration, we accept input (data or queries) from the outside world; then
```
we send a collection of identical worker processes sweeping over the trellis.
Each worker grabs a node-describing tuple, updates the corresponding node's
state and repeats, until no more nodes remain to be updated. Then we go on to
the next iteration. We've solved our load-balancing problem: tasks are
distributed dynamically to worker processes on each sweep. We no longer face the
problem of allocating processes to processors: each processor executes a single
worker process. Note also that under our new scheme, all trellis interconnection
information is localized in the master process. Rewiring the trellis—adding or
deleting a node, or changing decision procedures and, consequently, the
interconnection pattern—require changes to a single table in the master process
only. In the implementation of this scheme, our basic data structure will be a
task bag of the type discussed several times previously. This time, though, we
need to implement an iterative bag structure—once every task in a given bag has
been processed, workers must proceed to the next bag (or, alternatively, the
single bag must be refilled with the next iteration's tasks). There are (as
usual) many ways to implement this scheme. We'll describe one simple version. We
have a master and *n* worker processes.

The master maintains a data structure that describes the current state of every
node in the trellis. At the start of each iteration, the master accepts new data
values and queries. Some nodes will have to be updated on this sweep and others
won't. Nodes whose inferiors have changed state, whose superiors have sent them

```text
a query or who have been touched by a triggered probe will need to updated;
```
others won't. The master creates one task-describing tuple for each node that
requires updating, and dumps the tuples into a bag. The master executes the
following loop: while (TRUE) { /\* for the indefinite lifespan of this program

```text
\*/* accept input values or queries *;* identify nodes that need to be updated
this iteration *; for (* each node that needs updating *) { ++TasksThisRound;
out("task", TaskDescription); }; for (; TasksThisRound--; ) { in("result",
?NewStateValue); *record* NewStateValue; } } The worker's coordination framework
is simple: while (TRUE) { in("task", ?TaskDescription);* compute a new state for
this node *; out("result", NewStateValue); } The computational part of the
```
program is essentially the same as what we described in the previous section. A
task in this agenda-parallel version corresponds to the arrival of a new
input-stream tuple in the specialist-parallel program. The only significant
difference is that, in this new version, state- and query- tuples aren't
attached to the input streams of the relevant nodes. Instead, the fact that a
new state has been computed or that a query must be propagated is simply
recorded in the NewStateValue that is returned to the master in the result
tuple. The master is responsible for updating the trellis data structure and
scheduling the relevant nodes for execution during the next sweep. Note that
we've achieved not only dynamic load balancing but, as usual in our
agenda-parallel schemes, control over granularity. If the update computation at
a given node is too minor to cover the overhead of tasking, the master process
can group updates into clumps, dynamically if necessary. Variants of the scheme
are possible under which there is no master, merely a collection of identical
workers. We discuss such a scheme in the exercises.
### 8.6 Static scheduling
and realtime Now we come to the hard part. Suppose that we require not merely
that a trellis perform "well," but that it perform in *realtime*? Specifically:
input values arrive from the external world at a certain maximum frequency. How
can we guarantee that each new set of values is fully processed before the next
crop arrives? That each new set of values entering at the bottom has percolated
throughout the trellis before the next set is pumped in? "Realtime" is a word
that lacks a canonical definition. We don't require our program to meet
so-called "hard realtime" constraints—it needn't deliver reliably predictable
performance on a time scale that is comparable to a processor's clock frequency.
Hard realtime performance would require a realtime operating system and a
realtime Linda implementation. The operating system would have to avoid all
sources of unpredictable runtime at any scale (virtual memory, for example). The
Linda system would be required to report detailed expected-performance estimates
for all Linda operations, based on the runtime data structures chosen by the
optimizer for each tuple class. Having provided such a foundation, we could then
implement a hard realtime system using the techniques we'll describe below. But
the system we'll describe *does* meet the *relevant* realtime constraints for
its domain without this added complexity. In the medical monitoring domain, we
need to be able to guarantee performance on a time scale of seconds, not of
microseconds. This kind of constraint is typical of many problems in the
software-monitor domain. Our agenda-parallel trellis implementation allows us to
make certain statements that are germane to the realtime question. We know that,
in the worst case, assimilating a completely new set of data values will require
that every node in the trellis be updated. These updates will be distributed
over a series of iterations—in the first iteration the bottom-level of nodes is
updated, then the next level and so on. We know, too, how long it takes to
update each node. The state-computing functions associated with each node are

```text
fixed, of course; we can simply time arbitrarily many executions of each
```
node-update step and choose worst-case values. (Obviously, we must be able to
guarantee that each state function behaves in a fairly predictable way and that
it always converges. Our goal in general is the following: given a collection of
well-behaved, predictable state functions, build a parallel program that is also
well-behaved and predictable.)

Because we know the worst-case amount of work that is required in order to
process a new set of input values, we can predict approximately how long a
complete update of the trellis will require, given some number of workers among
whom the tasks are being shared. Unfortunately, though, the dynamic nature of
task-assignment in our agenda-parallel program introduces some uncertainty into
the timing: we don't know exactly which tasks each worker will grab, and so we
can't predict exactly how long each iteration will take. Dynamic task-assignment
introduces a measure of overhead as well as some uncertainty about timings.
Dumping task tuples into tuple space, and removing them, takes time. If each
worker knew* a priori *exactly what tasks it would be required to perform on
each iteration, we wouldn't need to distribute task tuples. Ordinarily we're
happy to pay the costs of such a distribution, because arriving at a good static
distribution of tasks would be difficult or impossible, and the costs of dynamic
tasking are often small. But the realtime trellis case is different. The fixed
structure of the trellis, and the predictable nature of trellis execution, make
it possible to arrive at a good static schedule. Furthermore, when we are
dealing with realtime requirements, predictability is crucial.
#### 8.6.1 A
realtime scheduling algorithm The actual strategy followed in achieving realtime
execution of the trellis is complicated. What is important here is the general
flavor of the approach. First, we need to define exactly what we're trying to
achieve. If no process generates a new state without receiving new information

```text
(either from an inferior or a write probe), any trellis program upon which no
```
probes are executed for a sufficiently long period of time eventually
*stabilizes*—that is, reaches a state in which there are no enabled or currently
executing processes (assuming all processes terminate whenever they execute).
Under the iterative execution scheme, any appropriately constrained trellis
program stabilizes in no more than 2 *Η*+ 1 sweeps, where *H* is the height of
the trellis (that is, the length of the longest directed path). For*H *+ 1

```text
sweeps, states can flow upward to the top of the trellis; for the next *H*
```
sweeps, queries can flow downward to the bottom of the trellis. The stability
property gives the trellis a predictable, well-defined, worst-case behavior. To
make a real-time guarantee, we must know how frequently new data values can

```text
arrive; we assume that the minimum interval that can pass between the entry of a
```
new set of data values is *τ,* the trellis's*period *. Every *τ* seconds, one
data value*or many values simultaneously *may be entered. We can now state our
realtime execution requirement: the program must run on enough processors so
that it is guaranteed to be able to analyze a set of inputs completely within
its period,*τ*. What does it mean to "analyze a set of inputs completely?" One
obvious definition is that the program must *stabilize* within *τ*. Hence, we
require that our realtime execution scheme be able to complete 2 *H*+ 1 sweeps
within *τ* seconds. Our goal is to find the smallest number of processors that
can meet this requirement, and to discover*how *they can meet it—how we can map
trellis nodes to processors in such a way that the trellis will stabilize within
*τ* seconds. Our general approach will be as follows. Starting with the set of
all trellis nodes, we distribute node-descriptions onto processors. During a

```text
sweep, each processor will update all trellis nodes that it holds locally; then
```
it will send information about the results of the sweep to other processors, in
preparation for the next sweep. Factor's heuristic scheduler [Fac90] is a
technique for placing node-descriptions onto processors in a way that's likely
to use a minimal number of processors in meeting the goal—namely, trellis
stabilization within *τ* seconds. ("Likely" because this is a

```text
scheduling*heuristic *; the scheduling problem can be shown to be NP-complete,
```
thus not amenable to a provably optimal scheduling algorithm. As a trellis grows
in size, such an algorithm would tend to run so slowly as to be useless.) In
order to perform this static assignment of trellis nodes to processors, we need
an analytic model that allows us to predict how long it takes to execute a
trellis until it stabilizes. We need such a model because our general procedure
will be to assign trellis nodes incrementally to processors, evaluating at each
stage how much time would be required to achieve stabilization given the
configuration that exists so far. The analytic model will be expressed in terms
of a collection of well-defined costs, most significantly the cost required to
read a tuple from tuple space, to update a tuple (by removing and then
re-inserting it), and to execute each node's update routine. We can then express
the time required for a trellis to stabilize in terms of a combination of these
costs, given a particular number of processors and some assignment of trellis
nodes to processors. Once we have a way of evaluating execution time given an
assignment of trellis nodes to processors, we can execute the heuristic
scheduling algorithm. The algorithm starts by assuming some fixed number of

```text
processors; then it tries to map trellis nodes onto those processors in such a
```
way that the timing goal is achieved. If it fails, number-of-processors is
incremented, and the procedure repeats. Figure 8.5 gives some speedup results
for several trellis programs running under the scheduler we've described.
### 8.7 Conclusions
The fact that we *can* design and assemble diverse, complex and potentially enormous parallel applications is reassuring. The fact that

```text
(having done so) we can make accurate predictions about their performance is remarkable. Parallel programming is a workable, practical,
```
manageable reality.
Among problems that lend themselves to network-shaped solutions,**circuit simulation**is one of the most interesting. It requires that we step
a circuit through a series of iterations as we trace signals and record the circuit's behavior. Such problems tend to be highly
compute-intensive and highly parallelizable.**Neural network**emulators are another example. Many**graph problems**lend themselves to

```text
programming in this style; we discuss one simple example in the exercises.
```
### 8.8 Exercises* Preliminary.*The first three questions ask you to build trellis programs of various kinds. First, though, we need to address the obvious
preliminary question: a trellis program that does*what *? To build a complete trellis, you need a hierarchical understanding of some domain,
and a set of decision procedures in which this understanding is captured precisely. (In the experiments we've conducted, we built the
coordination framework but other people supplied the domain expertise.)
These questions don't assume a fixed size trellis, but you should assemble roughly 50 decision procedures at least (arranged, perhaps, in 5

```text
levels) in order to attack them seriously. There are three reasonable ways to get these decision procedures; we'll list them in order, from less
```
to more interesting.
First, you could use synthetic decision procedures that do nothing: they read inferior-node states (which you can assume are arbitrary
integers), spin in a loop for some number of iterations to kill time, and then generate their own new, arbitrary "state." (This kind of synthetic
trellis is actually very useful for performance experiments, because it can be parameterized. You can test many different sorts of trellises by
varying the height-* vs.*-width of the trellis, the average number of inferior states each state depends on, and the average granularity of the
decision procedures.)
Second, you can make up your own set of decision procedures. Choose an arbitrary domain (or one you find interesting), and improvise
something. (We carried out initial trellis experiments in this way, targeted at automobile traffic networks. The point was to infer the location
of traffic blockages, and to reprogram traffic lights and highway-entrance-control lights dynamically for better throughput.)
Third, you can find a real domain expert. Most universities employ a fair number of such people. Rumor has it that domain expertise can
sometimes be found in the non-academic world as well. You might talk to medical people, to experts on finance, markets or economics
generally, to people with knowledge of factories, or of multi-factory manufacturing structures, to networks people (at telephone companies,
for example), to experts on any kind of transportation system, to scientists (particularly physicists) with large experimental setups to
monitor, and so on. The potential applicability of powerful expert monitors is nearly unlimited.

```text
1. Build a specialist-parallel trellis of the sort described in section 2; then
```
   build an agenda-parallel version of the master-worker variety
discussed in section 3. Compare the expressivity and efficiency of the two versions.
Suppose that your trellis problem were *non*-compute intensive: the computing power of a single processor is ample to run it effectively. Is
the trellis nonetheless a good software architecture for the monitoring problem? Which implementation strategy is better in this
case—specialist or agenda?
2. The master process in the agenda-parallel trellis you've just built is a
   potential bottleneck for large trellises. Build a new version that
supports multiple master processes (run your version with three masters, let's say, for concreteness). Clearly, workers should be able to grab
tasks generated by any master. There are (at least) two possible ways to handle the result tuples. They might be sent not to *any* master but to

```text
the right one; masters under this scheme may need to exchange some information, so that they are aware of state information describing
```
trellis nodes that are adjacent to any nodes they own. Or, every master might read *each* result tuple, updating its own part of the trellis graph
as appropriate. If you use this second scheme, you should implement a "garbage collected" read stream—result tuples are removed from the
read stream once all master processes have seen them.
3. Another way to deal with the master-as-bottleneck problem is to eliminate the
   master altogether. Modify your trellis program to make all
processes worker processes.
4.**Graph algorithms**of various kinds can be programmed using the techniques discussed in this chapter. Developing a cost-ordered list of
all paths between two nodes in a graph is a simple example. Write such a program using the "bug trudger" algorithm: create a bug and place
it on the origin node. Arrange for the bug to trudge outwards through the graph, generating new bugs whenever more than one path is
available. Each bug remembers the path it's taken so far. The destination node welcomes each incoming bug, squashes it, retrieves the
information it contains and inserts this data in a cost-ordered list. You must make sure, of course, that bugs don't wander in circles.
Program this algorithm either in specialist or in agenda style.
° (*Turingware*:) 5. Human organizations are generally arranged in tree-form: each person has a unique boss and (potentially) many boss-ees.

```text
What are the implications of arranging a human organization as a "person trellis"?—each individual has a place in a trellis graph; this trellis
```
represents the information-flow hierarchy within the organization. Hence, each individual has, potentially, many semi-bosses and
semi-boss-ees. Are there organizations for which such a strategy might be appropriate? What is the role of read and write probes in such a
structure? Would a (software) process trellis be a useful inter-person communication device in such an environment? Are there any uses for
a mixed process-person trellis, in which some trellis nodes are processes and others are people? (To put these questions in another way:
would it be possible to make all interactions with such an organization systematic, all mediated by the same software support tools? Might
inquiries from outside the organization be "attached" automatically to the right trellis node? Might many sub-organizations be coordinated
systematically, using probes, into a single multi-trellis? Might directors or accountants or investors monitor such an organization by
attaching probes as needed? Might* any* employee get the opportunity to take in the "big picture" by attaching his own probes?)
